my son in 2014 gave me a book by joseph
campbell called hero of thousand faces
and basically he described that you know
everybody crashes and then you're faced
with
that crash
and you either have an epiphany or you
don't
now you either walk off the field and
say hey i don't want to do this anymore
and you give up on that going after your
audacious goals also
i'm in the investment management
business that you have to bet against
the consensus and you have to bet
against the consensus and be right or as
an entrepreneur
i'm an entrepreneur i had to bet against
the consensus and be right and so to
gain that humility was the the thing so
you either get off the field or you
learn
[Music]
hey everybody today's episode is brought
to you by our very own impact theory
university enjoy the episode hey
everyone welcome to impact theory
today's guest is a number one new york
times best-selling author and the
founder of the most successful hedge
fund of all time he's returned more to
his investors than anyone else in this
space which would be amazing under any
circumstance but becomes even more
dazzling when you consider the fact that
he started out as just another
middle-class kid from long island he
struggled in high school barely got into
college but over the course of one of
the most storied investment careers in
history he turned himself into one of
the 100 wealthiest people on planet
earth with roughly 160 billion dollars
under management fortune magazine named
his company bridgewater one of the top
five most influential private companies
in the u.s and time magazine named him
personally as one of the 100 most
influential people alive he's been
called the da vinci of investing and
given his accurate prediction of the
2008 financial crisis it is not hard to
understand why using principles that
he'd established over decades he and his
team were able to recognize the coming
implosion and position his clients to
not only weather the storm but to come
out far better because of it now in a
new phase in his life and armed with the
conviction that there's nothing
inherently special about him and that
his methods can be adopted by anyone he
is embarked on a mission of both
financial and ideological philanthropy
that has made him one of the most sought
after voices in business leadership
so please help me in welcoming the
author of principles and big debt crises
the legendary ray dalio
hey tom what's up man how are you doing
good to see you thank you so much for
being here thanks for
dude your book
we stalked you so that that thanks is uh
definitely not necessary man what you
have done with your ideas and the fact
that you're taking the time to put them
out there is is absolutely
transformative in the way that i think
you were hoping they would be
and as somebody who when your book came
out i was in the middle of
building my first big company and we had
raced to 3 000 employees over the span
of five years and it was it was dizzying
to say the least and when i read the
book it made me realize that
for the first time in my life i'd really
had a failure of imagination it simply
didn't cross my mind that you could
expect a group that large to be
radically transparent with each other
and to have radical candor as a core
part of the company and so reading the
book it was sort of my if you know roger
bannister in the four minute mile was
like until you know that it can happen
it's
you just fail to even consider it as an
option and so reading what you've done
and the kind of culture that you've
built and the different questions that
you ask was really transformative so
thank you for all of that i'd say back
at you because
like you have your journey we're just
talking about your journey and the same
things happen over and over again right
and so if we go back to the themes and
that's really cool and what's also very
cool for me is the fact that you know
like we're moving ahead and we're
playing with literally the the tools and
you know how to do that and it's so
great because you know i'm 70 years old
and the thing that i want more than
anything is to pass along with those
things that have been helpful and so
it's cool i'm thank you for having me
here dude absolutely so
talk me briefly you've talked about this
so we don't have to go into a lot of
detail but if you can't just super fast
give us the thumbnail of how you realize
that you couldn't trust that you were
always right which was i think a pretty
powerful insight yeah well
um i guess like you you know you you
come along and how do you find out you
get whacked in the head
you get whacked in the head enough times
and you say i could be wrong and how do
you know i'm right in my case the the
really big case was that in um 1980 81 i
had calculated that american banks had
lent a lot more money to countries that
would not be able to pay the debt back
a lot of money banking crisis and that
was very controversial point of view so
i mean i'm talking about wow a big thing
happening and then um so it got reported
and then
mexico defaulted on its desk in august
1982 and i thought that we're now going
to go into an economic crisis because a
number of the other countries followed
and that was transpiring in that way and
i started my business since 75 by the
way and at 82 i think we had like eight
people and we loved each other and we
were doing that thing
but i um i couldn't have been more wrong
it was the exact bottom in the stock
market so i was very publicly wrong and
even more painfully had to let go those
people and i was so broke that i had to
borrow four thousand dollars from my dad
to help to pay for family bills i mean
it was so is painful
but you you know okay now you've got a
baseball bat to the head and how many
does it take and then you think okay how
do i know i'm right
how do i know i'm right so i was very
audacious
you know going after my goals and
whatever my opinion i didn't want to
lose that but you know now you're faced
with the choice you know like the way i
look at it is i want a great life how do
i have the greatest life but i can have
the risk of being wrong
and then
everything changed because i figured it
out
sort of like you did you talk about the
two u's which i think is extraordinarily
powerful i'd love for you to define that
and then also
knowing that one of those uses is the
emotional sort of ego side of you
how did you get out of your own way like
that when you say there's nothing really
extraordinary about you i will say that
that ability is rare in and of itself
and so that you could you
self-identified saying oh my god even
now when i look back on me testifying
before congress i am shocked at how
arrogant i was so to go from that to
actually welcome the humility and make
the change i'd love to know how you did
that
um
you know
my son in 2014 gave me a book by joseph
campbell called hero of a thousand faces
and basically he described that these
things happen you know everybody crashes
and then you're faced with
that crash
and you either have an epiphany or you
don't
now you either walk off the field and
say hey i don't want to do this anymore
and you give up on that going after your
audacious goals or you gain really
humility you you know how do you feel
that you're going to be wrong and so i
think then that whole notion is um
you know to come back with the
uh finding the smartest people i could
find who disagree with me
also i'm in the investment management
business that you have to bet against
the consensus
otherwise you can't make money because
it's in the price and you have to bet
against the consensus and be right or as
an entrepreneur
i'm an entrepreneur i had to bet against
the consensus and be right and so to
gain that humility was the the thing so
you either get off the field or you
learn right and so uh that was the
process
so i want to get back to the two use in
a second but were you already meditating
by this point yeah and do you think that
meditation gave you the ability to get
out from under the control of your
emotions yes
meditation was fantastic
meditation is the biggest gift that i
can give anyone and i would say more
than anything it is whatever reason for
success i've had
uh because it allows one
on back to the two yews i'll clarify
what i mean is that
in your mind that we think what do you
want
and the reality is when you look at the
neuroscience and psychology
that there are different parts of your
brain that want different things
and so in the simplest sense there is
the logical part of the brain that
you're conscious of it's called the
conscious
and you think you're being logical and
you want to make those decisions
and then there's the subliminal below
the limbic system part of the brain
which is the emotional and it's not as
conscious to you but it has more of an
influence on you than really the logical
one and so they're not aligned
and so when you're experiencing that
pain or let's say the ego right there
were two main things you got an ego
barrier and a blind spot barrier if you
can get past your ego barrier and you
get past your blind spot barrier you can
accomplish anything because you'll also
know that you don't have to do
everything to you have to figure it out
yourself you can take in from other
people the different ways to approach
things in the best possible way and so
the realization that we all are really
struggling with ourselves and to think
which are which is in control
meditation helps to deal with the
alignment of those two things because
both are valuable in other words
intuition imagination the things we
really love come from our subliminal
uses right our needs whatever they may
be they come from here that's subliminal
they may be valuable they may be
scared damaging you don't know the
difference and so when they come up and
you're looking at those with your
logical mind and you can align those
things you're probably in good shape if
you can do that that alignment between
the subliminal and the logical
and you can do that with other people so
that you can triangulate with other
people and say does that make sense
and get alignment that alignment is the
path to the future because you only have
to know what the best things to do are
you don't have to have them all come up
from your head and for god's sakes don't
be overly opinionated because just
because you have that opinion it doesn't
mean it's true
so that's where the two use and the
alignment really is so important all
right i want to talk about the process
of getting those two things aligned
tying this into meditation so in my own
experience meditation is a a stillness
it's a quiet from the chatter of the
mind and more maybe profoundly than that
i can feel my brain shifts into a
different gear so maybe it's less
linear thinking it's more lateral i'm
making connections that i might not
otherwise make so is it in in that still
in that quiet where you're able to look
at your what's bubbling up from beneath
the limbic system your your emotional
life you're able to look at that without
judgment
and then able to say okay but this is
what i'm trying to do sort of
consciously these are my plans and all
of that and now how do i are you
altering
either of them or are you beginning to
say
i need to understand if this is a useful
emotional driver or a destructive
emotional driver like what is that
process i think you describe it very
well
um
and when you go deeper by the way you go
literally into your subconscious
so you're creating a connection when you
transcend i do transcendental meditation
when you transcend
i i'm not conscious
and i'm not unconscious
i am in the subconscious i i'm not aware
but if somebody make a little noise like
that boom i would i would so it's not
like being asleep
and that's also by the way where
creativity comes from it you know it's
like you go take a hot shower and a
great idea comes not because you're
muscling it
so when you're having that
then um you're calm
and your natural state and then these
things bubble up and it helps that
alignment so you say uh okay let me look
go above myself
let me let me go above myself and look
at myself
within the context of my circumstances
what is around me how does that work how
does reality work
okay if i do this what are the
consequences
and so the going above it and just
saying i'm responsible for my decisions
my life and how do i navigate the things
the things there that i can pull the
levers up to who do i get how do i do
how do i deal with those and going above
it in that calm way
is really what it's about and when you
do it well with others
so you triangulate that's why i have the
radical truthfulness and the radical
transparency
when you have that radical truthfulness
and the radical transparency you're
triangulating with others you're going
above it with them and you're just
looking at that circumstance and you say
okay well we're in the same goal or are
we and then how do i navigate those so
that we get to where we want to go
because if you're forming your company
you've got your company we're on the
same mission together right so now let's
all go above ourselves what are your
strengths and weaknesses how do we get
at what's true
and how do we do that with transparency
and that's it
yeah oh man so so powerful and putting
into action i'm really seeing
exactly how it begins to
allow
and i think truth is probably the
what you call hyper realism the getting
to such an objective look at what is
true
um and going back to sort of an
objective look at that emotional state
which i think is where a lot of people
struggle one of the biggest
and most profound
probably the only lightning rod moment
in my life where it's like whoa my life
can be divided into before that
literal like instantaneous recognition
and after everything is completely
different and that was the first time
where i realized
that i was being driven by something
that i had not yet recognized which was
i was telling everybody that i wanted to
generate wealth in my life but i was
acting like i just wanted people to tell
me that i was smart and so the the like
friction between those like
hit this collision and so at the time i
was just a copywriter and the guys who
would later become my partners at the
time were my employers and we got this
huge fight over
something stupid and i was arguing an
argument arguing for my idea i needed my
idea to win because i had they were just
so much farther ahead than me they were
smarter than me and that they can
process data faster and that that's just
true like they could think through
things more rapidly than i could so i
was like i have an inferiority complex
over how fast they think and they're
like 15 years ahead of me as
entrepreneurs so i just always feel like
a buffoon and so i'm starting to really
feel badly about myself and so i'm
arguing for this dumb idea arguing
arguing arguing and then finally i wear
them down and they agree and i was like
[__] i know it's the wrong idea like
there's a voice in my head screaming you
know this is a stupid idea stop arguing
for it but i needed to win and so when
they left i thought okay whoa
what what's real i just need to know
what's real
no judgment on me
if what you want is to get rich you have
to change the way that you're acting
immediately but if what you really want
is to just feel smart you need to leave
this company because butting heads with
them every day and feeling inferior is
never going to get you there
and so in that i realized wait there's
actually a third option where i could
value myself entirely for learning and
if i switched my identity over from
being smart being right being good being
worthy to just i learned that's what i
do
then everything will change and it did
literally like that like i remember that
day so clearly so
to me what you're describing is just
another one of those
right
go go deeper on that concept the notion
that everything loops that history
repeats
because i think people get it from like
a u.s history class but they don't
necessarily understand it in their own
life there's practically nothing
that hasn't happened before really if
you look at the theme so when i take
your your particular case
i can digress into it but i i won't i'll
come back to that in in a second
almost everything that happens has
happened many many times before and just
like i described there's the hero's
journey and there's this and that
there's that particular path and the
whole thing happens over and over again
so my reaction um to what you're saying
is um yup that's absolutely right that's
a winning strategy so if you step back
from that and you write okay what
happened to you what what happened to
you is what we're talking about you went
above yourself okay
not so you exemplify it you okay here
are the things you went above yourself
now you could have had the ego thing the
big-o barrier okay the ego barrier is
going to be the thing that's sort of
going to kill you then by reconciling
what your subliminal desires were okay i
want to be
judged as smart
and then connecting that with your
intellect and saying okay now intellect
what is really going on here okay and
then to be able to step out of that now
you just did it alone but you could do
it with others and it's even better and
and so you figure out oh okay this is
that here's what the choices are here's
what how reality works
and so i'm just saying you did what we
were talking about right and if
everybody if everybody gets that and
really understands how to go do that the
number the two big things is how do you
get uh your alignment of your lower
level you with your upper level you how
do you get um past your ego and your
blind spot we know what the ego barrier
is like i got to be right or whatever it
is or i'm not good at this the blind
spot barrier is the realization that
people actually see things different
they see different things like somebody
will see the big picture somebody will
see the detail they'll focus on
different things almost like a color
spectrum type of thing and if you
realize that you will see a part of that
spectrum and other people will see the
other part of the spectrum and so that
you really need to when you go above
yourself you really need to orchestrate
all those ways of seeing because you are
not just one of those people that's got
to do it yourself your way of being the
success is to go above it and be the
orchestrator and know what you're good
at and what you're not good at so it's
almost like if you want your life to be
successful you will not let yourself do
certain things because you're just no
good at them once you get that picture
down then you can find the past wherever
the paths are you're open-minded because
you now you've given up your ego barrier
and your blind spot barrier so your
particular case just was another one of
those
yeah the concept of just another one of
those i think is
um it's bizarrely easy to miss in your
book
and so i want to linger on this point
for a second and it's funny because
people ask you this question all the
time and you give the same answer you're
so consistent and yet people don't spend
the time that you spend so let me
encapsulate uh you've done so well as an
investor it's kind of crazy and so
needless to say people are like all
right what's the strategy and your
answer is actually usually not specific
your answer is understand the historical
context understand the historical
context and get smart people around you
so you're not making decisions by
yourself so
the notion of it's another one of those
is looking at
investing looking at the human condition
looking at your own life as this thing
that has these repeating elements every
dimension of every
everything
the way is another one of those
and um so that's how you could if i can
get people to think
what i want to convey what that means
and then i
want to then understand how to think at
the principal level
because then life becomes so much easier
because if you have the principle and
what i mean by that
is um
like you could look at all the things
that are coming at you
and they're just the things coming at
you
if you instead
think of each thing as being like a type
of species
think about as an like an animal species
or something okay what one of those is
it
and how do i deal with those
and you have your principle for dealing
with those so you have the species
coming in you have a principle that
lines up with the species so now there's
no guesswork or re-figuring it out i
figure it's like um i don't know it's a
type of snake
that's coming at you but everything is
another one of those so when you start
to think about how do i deal with that
how does reality work and how do i deal
with those so the way it looks to me
i'll speak figuratively to help to
convey the image of what i mean by that
maybe there is something like 50
different personality types i don't know
what the exact number is
and they are all living out
the same scripts happen maybe they're
just 50 different scripts
and then through those you know maybe
there's a certain x hundred things
through time
and it seems all confusing because we're
looking at them bit bit by bit you know
it's like you're in a blizzard a
snowstorm and each of these bits come at
you and so on if you can kind of step
back and just say okay
okay what one of those is it and it's
happened before and it's happened to
different people so let's say for
example you have a kid and you think
okay now i'm a kid and you could just
sort of say okay now you're parenting
but whatever it is you can sort of says
hey it's happened before a million times
and in that particular circumstances so
when you realize everything happens over
and over again pretty much for the same
kind of reasons
okay and you understand that and you can
almost look at um who
who's been through it before who knows
how it works how do i best navigate that
thing what are my principles for that
then it's great the reason i discovered
it accidentally i discovered this
accidentally
is because i got in the habit that i'd
suggest you get into and other people
get into and that is
whenever you're in a situation where
you're making a decision important
decision
just pause and write down what type of
decision was it
and why did i make that decision that
way that's writing down your principles
it's kind of your recipe for success and
we could talk about it and then every
time i'm in a situation i'll write down
why did i make that decision and we
could look at those criteria did that
make sense to do that decision that way
would you have different criteria and so
on and you do that over a period of time
okay and then you have your principles
and then so they're just your reasons
for making your decisions and what
matters to you right
when you do that so that's why i'm
encouraging you because you're going
through these and then you have found a
path in life i viewed your story what
you just told me is just another one of
those now you keep doing it it'll become
apparent to you how everything's another
one of those because what will happen is
the next time around you're going to
find i don't know let's say you're
firing somebody use that as an example
you would say okay now i'm firing
somebody again okay now let me just kind
of reflect would i modify that principle
and how would i do that
and then okay now maybe you're firing
somebody who's been with you for 10
years and you love and that's not the
same as firing the son of a [__] who
you want to get rid of so then you
refine that how should i deal with that
one and that and why does it make sense
because that reflection why does it make
sense why does it make sense and really
wanting truthfulness you you know not
worried about being embarrassed making
mistakes we're only on the struggle with
all of you together is a good thing
yeah so the
how do you define a species like how do
you begin to codify all this stuff and
go
because i i think it's all too easy to
get lost in the well this isn't another
one of those this isn't just firing
somebody this is firing somebody that i
love and so no there's you know this oh
different it's simple because all you
have to do really is to sort to say if
you start to think everyone's another
one and i was when i make a decision i
just got to write down why i made the
decision
i don't care how you
title it okay just write down okay uh
okay what's
what are your criteria make it write it
down well you'll see that they're
close cousins you know let's say if
you're saying
is it a different one because it's a
close relationship that you've had for a
long time or somebody is new okay well
you'll see those two things are close
together okay but it's another one of
those things and it changes your way of
seeing things okay it changes your
perspective
again i want to repeat because then life
becomes easier
because it's not all these bits and
pieces
okay it's okay it's another one of those
it gives you an equanimity and like a
ninja okay it's another one of these
coming at me okay and how do i approach
that and then you can have a
conversation it's just reality how
should you deal with that reality
and if you do that then you think in a
whole different way okay you just want
to get to the best way to deal with your
realities you've talked about how about
30 of the people cannot do radical
candor
be great for you to i call it radical
transparency but whatever effects okay
so radical transparency define what that
is exactly and then what is it about
that 30
like are they
they can't get rid of the ego or
what what is that it's just what you're
talking about this the struggle is
between
themselves as you go into a conversation
and
and you're looking at that
um um they find something radical
transparency is saying super hard [__]
really direct nice and clear they're not
good at this yes while simultaneously
saying i don't know if that's true
in other words if i say
that i don't i don't think you're good
at that
i'm being honest but also who knows
whether you're good at that
so how do we then go from you think
you're good at it i don't think you're
good at it and how do we go through a
process to find out together whether
you're good at it or not how do we go
okay
that would be one of my key questions
okay the best way to do it is you do it
in an agreed upon way okay the idea is
okay we say okay tom you're not so good
at that i don't think okay and then we
go through the how would we judge can we
ask other people do we go through this
test or that test how do we find out
what's true because if you can find out
what's true
your life will be better like do you
want to know what you're not good at
if you know what you're not good at it's
your life's no problem because it you
don't even have to get good at it you
just have to work with somebody who's
good at what you're not good at right so
there's a path forward when you get out
of your head that you've got to do that
so the only basic notion is when we're
if we would have a relationship is if
you and by the way it's non-hierarchical
you could say hey ray i don't think
you're very good at that and i'm i'm
going to be the same way i put it in
because i needed it because i i'm
worried that i'm going to be wrong
so then you come to me and you say i
don't think it's very good well how do
we find out in a non-ego constrained
objective way whether i'm good at that
or not do you actually lay out criteria
like oh yeah we're gonna yeah you we
will do yeah
absolutely
how do you come upon that criteria would
you do this as a one-on-one would you do
this in a group
how do you begin to tease that stuff out
um first of all in terms of the group
um i like to make everything transparent
so
everybody could watch the same thing
happening with anybody so
you would do this in front of a large
group of people no no i would say taping
we do a lot of that radical transparency
because that way people see is it fair
is it a good process right so i like to
do that discussion but anybody can do it
with anybody right
and so but i would like to have that
conversation if it's like if if i don't
think you are good at something and i am
relevant to your life or vice versa we
got to work it out we've got to figure
that out together
in all relationships in one way or
another
you have to find out how you're going to
make decisions there are going to be
agreements and disagreements and you
have to have the art of thoughtful
disagreement now people find their
domains differently maybe somebody says
okay i'll take care of these things and
you take care of that i don't know some
people you know the traditional
household might say okay i'll take care
of making the money out and the man goes
out and he makes money in the world and
then one woman says i'll take care of
the kids we're not there anymore but
each role i'm trying to say in some way
you have to find out how to do the art
of thoughtful disagreement it's it makes
sense and then also knowing
what's good what you're good at and what
you're not good at it's a good thing to
know what you're good at and what you're
not good at right what do you do though
like when you let's say you and your
wife realize oh we actually have
something that we disagree with how to
do with the kids
and that's high stakes if you do
something wrong you could have a
material impact on on their psyche and
the way that they approach the world so
there's sort of elevated stakes and
there's just two of you unless you guys
had a way of appealing to other people
would it come down because you said
don't worry so much about what the
person's saying think about the process
by which they got there yeah so i'm
saying
whenever there's a disagreement between
two people that they can't
get along on that they should pause
and they should go above it
and they should say
how do we how should we deal with each
other when that happens
in other words what are our protocols
for
um working ourselves through that so
that we can then move beyond that to
make a decision and would a specific
protocol in a marriage be something like
if it has to do with the kids you have
more believability than i do so
therefore if we can't come to an
agreement we'll go with your decision
there are
that could be one of the protocols the
main thing i'm trying to convey
is
when people are ordinarily in an
argument
they just argue
and they and and they don't know the
ground rules they don't have a process
in place
so if you look above it
and you come up with whatever your rules
are it may be you could have domain it
may be that you have a mutually agreed
party that you would say okay let's
plead our cases to and have them mediate
it it could be a lot of different paths
could exist to say ah i think that's a
good path when we have a disagreement
how we plead our cases and then move
beyond it but you need to have the path
and that's what i mean by principled
level thinking go above it how should it
be
instead of you know this type of thing
right
we all need that in order to have
successful relationships
it's fundamental right when you got this
and you're not going above it and saying
why do you have this or how should this
occur then you've got trouble now my
question becomes what is it and and
i know a lot of people watching are
going to say okay i love this this
sounds amazing but i work in an
organization that doesn't do that
so
the people who
tap out is a two-part question which is
always dangerous the people who tap out
and say i can't work at bridgewater this
whole radical transparency thing freaks
me out
what is it that causes them to trip up
because that i think is the thing people
will encounter in other companies where
this isn't a thing
um so how do people
watch out for that what what should they
watch out for in people
i can answer
[Music]
in the generals i'm going to parse your
question in a way that i think will
answer your question that will give a
little bit clarity because there are two
things going on when you're uh
describing that because bridgewater is
very much the opposite of a lot of
companies meaning you could talk about
anything you could talk about
how we should be together you can say
so so that's a culture where the person
who has this struggle with that like uh
where they can say hey i think you're a
son of a [__] or they could say that to
me you could say anything you want and
then we try to find out is it true and
then we work ourselves through it so
their challenge is almost the opposite
of the other kind of challenge which is
the case in which you're trying to but
in all cases there is the notion of how
are we going to be with each other and
reaching that agreement so let's say you
want to be a certain way
with the people you're with like your
wife
it's the same path
if you cannot sit down and have a
conversation
about how we're going to be with each
other
because they won't welcome it
and that way of being is an unacceptable
way
of being for you and your development
get the hell out of there okay but you
have to be able to sit down and say
how are we going to be with each other
and will that be good for you and then
will that be good for me and you got to
be clear that's why culture is so
important you know what kind of culture
do i have in a culture in which i can
have those conversations or am i going
to be in a culture in which i can't i
hear so many cases because now now
because of i communicate with people on
social media you know i put the
principle there then we discuss each one
of those principles and i so
often run into people who say
but i can't talk to my boss that way and
i can't have this conversation and i
can't do this and that
and it's very simple thing like okay so
we're going to do about it and what you
know like if i can't talk to you
and whatever and i'm going to not be
able to even know what's true because i
can't have the conversation
i'm going to have a terribly a terrible
life i'm having the life that i don't
want i don't even know the direction i
can't be in the mission with you and so
i'm going to be in this terrible life
now you have a choice do you want that
terrible life to be smothered in that
particular way but realize there's a
world out there don't feel so trapped
unless you really are trapped trapped
trapped but most people aren't it's like
it's like um you know too many fish in
the sea there are a lot of people are
married if the first one is not working
out right and it really is fundamentally
wrong okay move on
and your job it's the same thing so
decide okay where you want to go because
those are the path own it what are you
going to do about it you have to move on
okay so either have a great relationship
like you you and your wife or the same
at work
or move on
what are some of the most
um surprising principles that you've
learned over the years things that
really take people back
well that life works almost the opposite
than
the way you believe it works
that the things
that you think
are good
are often bad for you can you give me an
example oh it happens all the time this
first order consequence versus the
second order yeah
like it feels good almost always or
quite often the first order consequences
of things like
um
i feels good it makes me happy i don't
want to argue
i don't want to deal with the challenges
i want to avoid the pain
that whole litany of things that you
would say ah that's going to bring you a
happy life kind of thing
the second order consequences are more
often the
opposite than the first order
consequences i mean just so i don't know
the foods you eat the ones that taste
good are the probably the ones that
aren't the ones that you should be
eating or something so now when you
start to realize that life is almost a
trick
okay
it's almost a trick
okay are you gonna go for the first
order consequences or the second order
consequences or i don't i don't want to
argue
or i don't want to
or the whole ego thing okay i want to
feel good because i want to feel good
about myself because i don't want to
discuss whether i have those weaknesses
on and on and on okay is radical
truthfulness a good thing or a bad thing
i look at this you know like i say oh
look all we're doing is being truthful
and transparent
what's the problem with this like okay
you're being truthful
so but but and then people you ask them
what's the problem or do you want to
know what your weaknesses are and you
ask them what's the problem
okay it's always that that's not healthy
so so many aspects of life
are more actually
the opposite convention like comfort
it's comfortable
well look life teaches you over and over
again you want to get stronger okay it's
not comfortable you want
okay so stronger does not go with
necessary comfortable pain
okay
pain plus reflection equals progress
pain
is a teacher
you want to eliminate pain from your
life you're going to have a better life
no no no because it's given you messages
okay so so many different things are the
opposite of what we're taught and it
goes down to even the education system
okay you failed
hey that's the beginning of a discovery
process that's a good thing okay okay
now how do i look at failure and learn
from failure no you're stupid you failed
how do people
find out like their nature and do you
think of us all as having a sort of true
nature and then
from that how do people
decide on the paths of
accomplishment or savoring and what to
define those for people yeah there's
there's a couple of concepts in there so
i'll uh
and they're related and uh uh but i'll
possible um
first of all on the nature it's really a
self-discovery process
discovering what you want
discovering what you're like
like you were describing your various
cases where you're discovering what you
like and then you go through that
discovery and and the best way to do
that is to want to do that right
it takes an hour and it's a
self-discovery thing and i
yeah and and we've used others we've
used myers-briggs team dimension
workplace inventory and so other and
then we move beyond that the main thing
like is if you want self-discovery and
then you then you'll find your ways of
getting the self-discovery they'll
appear all around you and yes you have
your nature the thing that pulled don't
be you know a round peg in a square hole
find your nature what's going to
flourish and make your you know that's
why i said when you were talking about
your development mind too make your
passion and your work the same thing
know what your nature is yes so i
believe in terms of um that particular
nature then we get to the particular of
one of the big choices in life is savor
life
or
um
accomplish
like we have a lot of choices in our
lives and they're almost sort of
mutually exclusive sometimes
uh you know i just i want to go to the
ball game and i want to watch movie
and i want to do that and i just want to
sit back
and on a nice day and smell the roses
okay
simultaneously
i want to change the world
okay
i want to change the world and i've got
this or
um the work life balance question and
all of those we face those types of
choices right
so um
it's really important to go above
oneself and to reflect on that and also
by the way to realize
that
the choices
are not
you're approaching the choice
wrong
when you
often see it as kind of that trade-off
because
the truth is
you can have a lot more life and you can
have a lot more
if you just know how to get more out of
a minute how much do i get per per
minute or how much do i get per hour do
you have secrets on that because well
there were there are a number of them in
in here but and we could talk about them
but the
capacity
to rather than we do all have to face
our choices
but to also realize that you can expand
how much life you're going to get out of
life and how at that range
if you really do it well
so
there are those choices which are those
choices and we face them and then you
have to decide how to do them well give
me a couple
things that i can do to get more out of
a minute
first of all
if you do make your passion and you work
the same thing
um then you're it's great right because
your passion uh whatever it might be
you're a painter or you're an
entrepreneur or whatever that is
and you find that more enjoyable than
going to a ball game let's say then
that's becomes a passionate thing that's
one thing second to know how to
work with people who can do things
really well to get the most leverage out
of people okay third how do you get
yourself really what are the right work
habits
um you know anyway there's a whole bunch
of those kinds of things where you how
do i just just what you say how do i get
it done without me doing it
who's the best to do it and how do i get
it oh you all of a sudden you open
yourself to up to all different
possibilities of how you can do that
right
no time i think tim ferriss wrote what
the four-minute
or the four-hour
work week here work week or something
like okay for our work week okay or okay
there are approaches
uh all those ways of being able to do
that so i just gave you uh uh you know a
few what are the elements of struggling
well
what does it mean to struggle well and
how do we do it
well
first
that
that's why that phrase i use the phrase
struggle well
or tough love
okay i put those words together
because that
exam exemplifies the fact that people
don't think they go together
and so if you start to realize
struggling well
is what you're
will get you what you want okay
rather than avoiding struggle
that's what i'm trying to convey and so
if you realize that then you will go to
the struggle
you won't be averse to the struggle and
you will think and then under that in
the book i wrote all these different
ways of what it means to struggle well
okay how you uh have thoughtful
disagreement how you listen to maybe
you're not good at that or not how you
learn how you navigate all the ways
through that so that you get stronger
because if you don't struggle you won't
get stronger
okay so struggling well go above it you
know okay struggling well a big element
is to go above your struggle just like
you did i you look back and say okay um
am i struggling well rather than be in
it and doing those things so there are a
lot of different ways of how to struggle
well but if you know okay that
struggling is a good thing
okay if you want to be strong it's a
good thing i'll give you another example
i have a
saying
if you worry you don't have to worry
and if you don't worry you have to worry
okay
because what i mean is
um if you're worrying about what can go
wrong
your chances are you will create the
protections against that thing going
wrong
and therefore that's good
and if you're not worrying about the
things that are going to go wrong
then now probably the things you never
expect are going to come and hit you
okay
and so it sounds counter-intuitive
if you worry you don't have to worry
don't worry you better worry
but what it means is that process of
okay go to the thing go to it and enjoy
it view these things as puzzles your
personality will change you'll enjoy it
okay because life is a puzzle it's it's
a going through the jungle
okay it's it's like that i'll i'll tell
you a story yeah
so i um i crash
and i figure oh
risk and reward go together
you want to have a great life
okay and you want to be safe at the same
time they sound almost like mutually
exclusive
okay
so i ha so i viewed it as okay i'm like
sitting on one side of a jungle and that
if i can get to the other side of the
jungle safely i'll have a great life but
uh okay but if i cross the jungle all
sorts of things going to happen now what
am i going to choose am i going to be on
this side of the jungle and uh have just
an ordinary life
or am i going to have what i think is
the best life possible but oh i can get
bit and all those things and that's just
the nature of life and then i and i said
i have to it's my nature i have to have
the best life i can have so i've got to
go into the jungle now the question is
how do i go into that jungle and be
successful at that and i could tell you
the answer
the answer is first by worrying about
what i don't see that i might be wrong
with
and to do it with people who see the
things that i might not see
and we are all doing and as a mission to
get through that jungle well together
and when i went through that jungle and
we do that together
the thing i found out which is so
wonderful is i don't want to leave the
jungle i don't want to get to the other
side because i want to be with those
people on that mission and that whole
experiences becomes great so i found my
way to be successful in the jungle to
get to the other side and i found out
what really is a great reward
yeah that's extraordinary and and i that
resonates with me so hard about really
enjoying the struggle and a that's
what's making you stronger b there's
just something innate certainly with a
certain personality type that that is
what you're going to love is that fight
and reaching your limits and pushing
beyond them now i'm curious
is there going to be a struggle for you
in the third phase is there a new jungle
that you're going into so you've to
quickly define that for people you said
in phase one you're dependent on others
you're essentially a child and you're
learning phase two you go to work other
people become dependent on you and at
the end of phase two you pass it off to
other people you want them to thrive
without you you give them the knowledge
and the wherewithal and then in phase
three you
savor
uh
um
you savor life
um what's that going to look like for
you it's the freedom to do whatever you
want to do without obligations it is the
realization that you shouldn't and it's
not good to control anybody it's just
savoring life that you have
you can do anything you want you go from
free you go to freedom
um if there's a life arc
yes
there's a life arc and in um
i i put together this book as a 600 page
book i also then uh was asked by a lot
of people to make a
simpler version
about principles for success into a
little book and it'll be out
or putting it out on the newsstands you
actually could be pre-ordered on amazon
and in that book i show a life arc and i
track through what are the various
phases of life
and what what is the happiest phase what
is the least happy phase and how does it
work
and i could take you through all that if
you're interested i'm very interested oh
okay well i don't depends how much time
we got but uh okay that uh maybe the
slightly nutshell okay this the nutshell
version is you start off and it it is
very very um it's it's a really
enjoyable phase in life you start to
have uh start to experience
responsibilities like junior year okay
do i get into the school i want to get
into or whatever that's quite common
college is great it's exploratory come
out of college there's the most amount
of freedom you have so that transition
and school coming to now the new phase
of life is totally different than the
first phase of life because what it
means is you don't follow any track all
all through there you were following
track in the definit and the direction
of others and now you can live anywhere
you want you can pick any job you want
you can do anything you want you have
total freedom there's no guide you can
do anything you want you have that
freedom and you move forward with that
and then you start to make decisions and
you start to
take on obligations you might get
married you might have kids you have
jobs and you take on that and the
least happy period in life by sir
surveys of happiness
is um 45 to 55 okay that
because that then you have oh
the work life balance
and the obligations and too many things
to do and uh and then maybe it's not as
ideal as idyllic as you want you know ah
you get into the marriage and whatever
it is and then maybe it's not the
marriage that you expected or the things
that you're having and all of those
things that's a difficult phase of life
that middle part of that phase in life
45 to 55 and so on
and then people transition it's
interesting and opposite than what i
would have expected
that the happiest phase in life
is um between uh 60 and 80.
and and the you know the funny thing
about it which is really funny
um they ask people um
um
how good do you how good do you look
um and they rate it the highest at that
age now that's not true right but what
happens is people at that point feel
more comfortable with themselves in
various ways
when you make that transition you're
eliminating all of those obligations
you're eliminating all of those things
you're giving yourself free i don't have
to take care of it i savor oh my family
is well without me or whatever is i've
got the free time i could do whatever i
want to do that doesn't mean life isn't
exciting i find life very exciting i'm
very vital i like those types of things
but totally free of choice and you also
savor the life arc you know even
as people approach their death they
approach the death in a whole different
way than what death seems to be for
people in their early years right oh
you're a terrible terrible thing no it's
just part of that particular process and
how do you do that life arc and ah the
curtain goes down you know and that is a
different phase in life so um you know
my responsibility now is to pass along
what i'm doing like right i got plenty
of money so i'm not working for money
i'm giving away plenty of money because
of because it helps and whatever and i'm
just passing along i'll have that out
life arc and and then i'm going to go
quiet
and i'm going and i savor life and yeah
i could just i love nature so i go
outside in nature okay that has a big
effect on me i love it so that's what
the third phase of my life looks like
yeah man that the whole notion that
you're living an arc that there are
phases i think is
really important and i i don't think
enough people recognize that your frame
of reference will change as you move
from phase to phase and what was
important to you in one phase will not
be important to you in the next and to
because i was thinking as you were
talking i was like i personally don't
believe that you can skip a phase i
don't think that certainly not with my
personality and probably not with yours
it's not like you can skip the the
accomplishment phase and go straight to
the saver phase and i thought about that
you know my wife and i made enough money
we could buy an island and retire and
and just be done with it and when i
really thought about how that would make
me feel
didn't seem like it would make me feel
the way that i want to feel because i
still want to be in the jungle but as i
hear you describe the savoring it's like
yeah i get how my life could get to a
point where that's what i would crave
yeah you see what i'm hearing you do
well is you're looking down on yourself
again you're describing i'm looking at
how i feel i'm looking at so you're
connecting the the feelings with the
thinking and i so that's that's true and
in terms of no of course there's a
sequence to that life what i did in the
book which would be fun for people to do
is i show all the different markers in
in
all the different phases and little
boxes next to them and so what they can
do is they can check where they are they
know exactly where they are and then
also by showing that i'm showing them
what they can expect
because if they're if you're here on
that arc you can expect these things
probably as you're going check check
check those are the things now you can
start to imagine where do i want to be
in 10 years and also where are the
people i love
who i care about or what are their
relationships where will they be where
will my children be in 10 years and what
will they go through or what will my
parents where will they be in 10 years
and how will that relate to how i want
to have my life go because
and it's the same thing that you'll see
the same things happen over and over
again all these lives are basically kind
of the same thing so and when you put
that in perspective and you step back
and you look at it it's really great
yeah when you were saying that i
actually was getting a little emotional
the notion of it's another one of those
like the and i say that in a way
designed to remove fear and uncertainty
which is something that paralyzes so
many people and i think one of the
things you've really given certainly me
and anybody who's really deeply come in
contact with your work is that sense of
there is that higher perspective that
shows that you're not the first person
to have a child you're not the first
person to embarrass yourself publicly
you're not the first person to go
through whatever heartbreak or heartache
that you're going through and when you
can contextualize it then you get to
another thing that you've said which of
course um buddhists have been saying for
a long time this too shall pass like
whatever
hardship you're in the middle of or
whatever joy you're in the middle of
it's it's all part of a cycle and so
all of it will
ease in the end
and so yeah and your preferences will
change
realizing how it works
is so great because like the thing you
love at 10
is different than the thing you love at
or 30.
we all can think what is the thing you
loved at 20 or 30.
[Music]
that was fun
and then you go to 40
and you go to 50
and they change and to realize how they
will change
and and you move beyond
it's it's beautiful and it's helpful
that's incredible
ray i will be deeply saddened when you
finish your time of getting all of this
out into the world but i am beyond
grateful that you've taken the time to
do it certainly there was no obligation
to do all this but it's just beyond
extraordinary man thank you for all of
it as somebody who uses your tools in
this company my gratitude knows no
bounds it they really are the most
profound business tools i've ever
encountered in my life
i don't know how much you want us
talking about exactly what we're using
yet
but just know that we're insanely
grateful
where can people connect with you in the
remaining time that we have with the
public ray dalio
um
i would recommend that if you're
interested in what we're talking about
um the best thing if you have an iphone
um you can go on principles
principles in action on the there's a
free app and it gives the book and it
actually takes people into what the
culture is like and all that and it's
free so that would be that's it's the
book plus stuff it also has a an app
there that helps you write down your own
principles so the exercise that i was
describing to you where in other words
you're in it and now what's what one of
those is it and what's my principle it's
provided there so that you can capture
principles and easily call them up
anyway that would i think people find
people helpful i'm also on um exchanging
thoughts on social media we have um um
what we call the principles of the day
we talk about that particular principles
a day we're doing that um
in a number of places and i'll do that
until i pass the tools along the tools
are coming in january there'll be a
number of those i imagine they'll be
pressed along take something like a year
and then i'll be done and we'll move
past it it's incredible man
all right
thank you by the way
thank you in the following way like it's
such a joy to be passing these along
really it's it's it's a joy and a relief
and so to be able to do that and to see
like the impact that's happening on you
and your company
and all of that is i mean that's all i
want really and so that is a joy so i
reciprocate i i'm glad you
are deriving a lot of benefit and thank
you for the joy in sharing with me that
benefit that it's producing oh yes no
problem
what is the impact that you want to have
on the world
well right now all i want to do is just
pass along what's been good for me for
people who look at it take it or leave
it and and that's it i don't have a goal
of making something
different than it should be
okay but it if if it's like if you found
a cure for cancer or you found something
that was really valuable to you
and you wouldn't want to
have a die with you
and though so just like you're deriving
the benefit i just want to put it out
there and let people decide for
themselves whether it's valuable and
that's all i want to do and whatever
happens is okay
right so i don't have to change the
world whatever it will naturally find
its place evolution will decide its
value i love that
all right guys he would want me to tell
you that he's just another one of those
that is definitely not how it feels if
you haven't read his books read them i
assure you they are something completely
unique and different it's the way that
he thinks and conceptualizes whether you
want to be a better mom whether you want
to be a better entrepreneur it's pretty
irrelevant
the way that he gets you to think is the
important part so the actual specific
principles are less powerful than the
concept of another one of those and
having principles and knowing how to
categorize things and think through them
he is putting out some of the most
life-altering material i have ever come
across i you guys have seen enough of
these episodes to know like i don't rave
this highly about stuff very often it is
that transformational it's had that kind
of impact on me personally and the
business i can't encourage you to dive
in enough if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
ray
thank you thank you
thank you
thank you if you go in and ask for a
raise you're not devaluing yourself
you're actually increasing your value
because what type of person would go in
and ask for a raise a top performer so
the second thing is they believe that
they have to kick down the door of their
boss and say like give me